test (#2295)
CliMA/ClimaCore.jl: docs/src/math_framework.md

\mathbf{e}^i = \nabla_x \xi^i
```

> Here is an intuitive example of how the _contravariant basis_ and _covariant basis_ changes when a coordinate is being transformed.

Reviewer: Hi @yiyuef , thank you for your contributions! I would suggest that you rephrase some sentences a bit.

```suggestion
Here is a visual representation of how vectors can be represented in _contravariant_ and _covariant_ bases.
```

![Different bases supported in ClimaCore.jl](controva_cova.png)

Start with the _contravariant basis_, which is the case that most of us is more familier. As it can be seen in the figure below, we have 2D vector $\vec{a}$, 

> and two unit vectors $\vec{e_{1}}$ and $\vec{e_{2}}$, served as two basis. Thus we can represent vector $\vec{a}$ as:

Reviewer: Even this sentence can be rephrased a bit (as it has some grammar slips/typos). Also, the figure is above of this text, not below.

```math
\vec{a} = a^{1} \vec{e_{1}} + a^{2} \vec{e_{2}}
```

And now we set amplify one of the basis $\vec{a}$ by 2 times, that is $\vec{e_{1}}^{'} = 2\vec{e_{1}}$. If we want to maintain the vector $\vec{a}$ to stay still, 
obviously we need to set $a^{1}$ to its half:
```math
a^{1'}  = \frac{1}{2} a^{1}
```

With this being said, the components we use to describe a certain vector are changing in the opposite manner of the the basis, and we are calling these 

> components _contravariant components_. The _contravariant vector_ is a vector with _contravariant components_. 

Reviewer: This does not match what @dennisYatunin  said in the PR conversation. 

> `CovariantVectors` are aligned with the contravariant basis vectors, but have covariant components

Please update accordingly

represent vector $\vec{b}$ in a "controvariant component" manner:
```math
\vec{b} = b^{1} \vec{e_{1}} + b^{2} \vec{e_{2}}
```

Then we try to project vector $\vec{b}$ onto the two unit vectors, and we have the following:
```math
b_{1} = \vec{b}\cdot  \vec{e_{1}}
```
```math
b_{2} = \vec{b}\cdot  \vec{e_{2}}
```

If we plug $\vec{b} = b^{1} \vec{e_{1}} + b^{2} \vec{e_{2}}$ into the above two equations, we can have:
```math
b_{1} = \vec{b}\cdot  \vec{e_{1}} = b^{1} \vec{e_{1}} \cdot \vec{e_{1}}+ b^{2} \vec{e_{2}}\cdot \vec{e_{1}} 
```
```math
b_{2} = \vec{b}\cdot  \vec{e_{2}} = b^{2} \vec{e_{2}} \cdot \vec{e_{1}}+ b^{2} \vec{e_{2}}\cdot \vec{e_{2}} 
```

And in this case, if we still amplify one of the basis $\vec{a}$ by 2 times, it is not difficult to find that $b_{1}$ would also be amplified by 2 times!
```math
b_{1}^{'} = b^{1} \vec{e_{1}}^{'} \cdot \vec{e_{1}}+ b^{2} \vec{e_{2}}\cdot \vec{e_{1}}^{'} = 2 (b^{1} \vec{e_{1}} \cdot \vec{e_{1}}+ b^{2} \vec{e_{2}}\cdot \vec{e_{1}} )
```

In this case, the components of this vector are changing in the same manner of the the basis, and we are calling these 

> components _covariant components_. The _covariant vector_ is a vector with _covariant components_. 

Reviewer: Same as above. Please update according to Dennis' comment. 

Thank you!

Author: Hi Prof. Barra, thanks for your notes! Yes I understand these typos and misleading terms. I think now they are in a good form.

\mathbf{e}^i = \nabla_x \xi^i
```

> If we plot these basis in a curvilinear space, _Covariant basis_ “ride along” the coordinate surfaces (parallel), 
> while _contravariant basis_ “stick out” of those surfaces (perpendicular). See the plot below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we plot these bases in a curvilinear space, _covariant basis_ vectors “ride along” the coordinate surface liness (parallel),  while _contravariant basis_ vectors “stick out” of those surface lines (perpendicular). See the plot below:
```

Author: Done!

> ![normal and tangent](normal_tangent.png)

Author: Done!

![Different bases](controva_cova.png)

Start with the _contravariant components_, which is exactly the definition of vectors we usually meet. 
As it can be seen in the figure above, we have a 2D vector $\vec{a}$, 
and two unit vectors $\vec{e_{1}}$ and $\vec{e_{2}}$, served as two basis. Thus we can represent vector $\vec{a}$ as:
```math
\vec{a} = a^{1} \vec{e_{1}} + a^{2} \vec{e_{2}}
```

And now we set amplify one of the basis $\vec{a}$ by 2 times, that is $\vec{e_{1}}^{'} = 2\vec{e_{1}}$. 
If we want to maintain the vector $\vec{a}$ to stay still, 
obviously we need to set $a^{1}$ to its half:
```math
a^{1'}  = \frac{1}{2} a^{1}
```

With this being said, the components we use to describe a certain vector are changing in the opposite manner of the the basis, 
and we are calling these components _contravariant components_. This case corresponds to the definition of `ContravariantVector`s in ClimaCore.jl. 

Now consider the _covariant components_. We still have a 2D vector, but calling it $\vec{b}$. 
So if with the unit vectors $\vec{e_{1}}$ and $\vec{e_{2}}$, we can still 

> represent vector $\vec{b}$ in a "controvariant component" manner:

Reviewer: Hi @yiyuef , this description is still too "informal" perhaps (?) and does not read very well. I would refer to the [Wiki page](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Covariance_and_contravariance_of_vectors) if you really wanted to describe covariance and contravariance of vectors. Although this might not even be necessary here in the ClimaCore documentation, unless the ClimaCore API is counterinuitive with what the common definition is. Since you explained already above what convention ClimCore follows (lines 75-76), this might be redundant. Thank you

Author: I deleted this part, and made the remaining part a bit more formal.

\mathbf{e}^i = \nabla_x \xi^i
```

If we plot these bases in a curvilinear space, _covariant basis_ vectors “ride along” the coordinate surface liness (parallel),  while _contravariant basis_ vectors “stick out” of those surface lines (perpendicular). See the plot from [Yatunin2025](@cite) below:

![normal and tangent](normal_tangent.png)

Here is a visual representation of how vectors can be represented in _contravariant_ and _covariant_ components.

![Different bases](controva_cova.png)

> From the above two figures, we can see that parallel projections would lead to controvariant components, 
> while perpendicular projection would lead to covariant components.

Reviewer: Grammar:
```suggestion
From the above two figures, we can see that parallel projections would lead to contravariant components, 
while perpendicular projections would lead to covariant components.
```

Also: your figure uses subscripts and superscripts for both panels (left, where you project parallel to the base vectors, and right, where you project perpendicular to the base vectors) the same. This is opposite to what you describe above on lines 69 and 73.

Author: Prof. Barra,

I have corrected the typos. 

Now in the figure, for covariant components, I used subscripts; and for contravariant components, I used superscripts.

Thanks!

Reviewer: Hi @yiyuef , sorry, but we want the image to be as consistent in notation with the existing documentation and image from the paper. If you look at the image from the paper, we used "hats" for unitary/basis vectors "e" and not arrows. We need to be consistent. Sorry

Author: Prof. Barra,

I changed the figure.
I also modified the notation form in documentation words, where I changed vector notation from arrow to bold font.

> while perpendicular projections would lead to covariant components $b_{1} = \mathbf{b}\cdot \mathbf{e}_1$ and $b_{2} = \mathbf{b}\cdot \mathbf{e}_2$.

Reviewer: Hi @yiyuef, I still have a question about the notation you used in your figure. To be consistent with the figure above from the paper, shouldn't your covariant components be defined in terms of contravariant bases, i.e., use the superscript for the unitary vectors "e", as in:

```suggestion
while perpendicular projections would lead to covariant components $b_{1} = \mathbf{b}\cdot \mathbf{e}^1$ and $b_{2} = \mathbf{b}\cdot \mathbf{e}^2$.
```
?

Therefore, also the unitary "e" vectors in the figure should have superscripts rather than subscripts?
Thank you.

![Screenshot from 2025-05-16 10-50-37](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/6578066d-493b-4386-9f7a-d4a3f1c1d13a)

Author: Prof. Barra, Sorry for the delay. 

So $\mathbf{e}_1$ and $\mathbf{e}_2$ in my figure is exactly covariant basis, thus $a^{1}$ and $a^{2}$ are contravariant components. This is no problem right?

Then, what I want to convey next is that $\mathbf{b}\cdot \mathbf{e}_1$ and $\mathbf{b}\cdot \mathbf{e}_2$ themselves are covariant components. And I didnt specify any contravariant basis related to them.

I am not sure if this would be a clear explanation.

Reviewer: Hi @dennisYatunin , please take a look at  this quick documentation PR. If it does look to you and think that might be a useful contribution to the docs, it is fine to merge by me. As far as I am concerned, I am still a bit unsure about the notation used in this figure to match the one in the paper. Thank you!

As to better connect the original idea of _covariant components_ / _contravariant components_ with the real application in ClimaCore.jl, 
we bring the case of __polar coordinates__ -- a classic example of a __curvilinear coordinate system__.

First of all, we have the Polar‐to‐Cartesian mapping as following:
```math
\mathbf{r} (r,\theta ) = (r \cos \theta, r \sin \theta)
```

Then we have the _covariant basis_:
```math
\mathbf{e}_r = \frac{\partial \mathbf{r} }{\partial r}  = \frac{\partial (r \cos \theta, r \sin \theta) }{\partial r} = (\cos \theta, \sin \theta)
```
```math
\mathbf{e}_{\theta} = \frac{\partial \mathbf{r} }{\partial \theta }  = \frac{\partial (r \cos \theta, r \sin \theta) }{\partial \theta } = (-r\sin \theta,r \cos \theta)
```

> $\mathbf{e}_r$ represents the direction that is tangent to the "radius direction", and $\mathbf{e}_{\theta}$ is tangent to the circle curve itself.

Author: done!

And the _contravariant basis_:

> since we have $r(x,y) = \sqrt{x^{2} +y^{2}  }$ and $\theta (x,y) = \arctan (\frac{y}{x} )$. Thus,

Author: done

```math
\mathbf{e}^r = \nabla r(x,y) = (\frac{x}{\sqrt{x^{2} +y^{2}  }}, \frac{y}{\sqrt{x^{2} +y^{2}  }}) = (\frac{x}{r},\frac{y}{r} ) = (\cos \theta, \sin \theta)
```
```math
\mathbf{e}^{\theta} = \nabla \theta(x,y) = (\frac{-y}{x^{2} +y^{2}}, \frac{x}{x^{2} +y^{2}})  = (\frac{-\sin \theta}{r} , \frac{\cos \theta}{r})
```

> 

Author: done!

> $\mathbf{e}^r$ represents the direction that is perpendicular to the circle curve, and $\mathbf{e}^{\theta}$ is perpendicular to the "radius direction".

Author: done!
